---
title: Graphs
author: Maged Helmy
date: 2018-09-10 14:00:00 +0100
categories: [Blogging, Articles]
tags: [data_structure_and_algorithms]
---

Data Structure - Graph Data Structure:

A graph is a pictorial representation of a set of objects where some pairs of objects are connected by links. The interconnected objects are represented by points termed as vertices, and the link that connect the vertices are called edges. A graph is a pair of sets (V,E), where V is the set of vertices and E is the set of edges, connecting the pairs of vertices, looks the following.

V = {a, b, c, d, e}
E= {ab, ac, bd, cd, ed}

Graph Data Structure:
Mathematical graphs can be represented in the data structure. We can represent a graph using an array of vertices and a 2D array of edges.
-	Vertex: Each node of the graph is represented as a vertex.
-	Edge: Edge represents a path between two vertices.
-	Adjacency: Two node or vertices are adjacent if they are connected to each other through an edge.
-	Path: represents a sequence of edges between the two vertices.
The operations are Add vertex, add edge, and display vertex.
The users of graph extends to almost every application in computer science including navigation systems, web page links, data transmission, social networks, fluid dynamics, critical path analysis, 3D modelling and game and simulations. Typically a graph will have more edges than vertices, a graph with a lot of edges is called a dense graph, a graph with few edges in relative to vertices is called a sparse graph. In some graphs, a directed graph/digraph is when the edges are in one direction. A graph with bidirectional vertices is unordered graph or simply a graph. Each edge in the graph can have a weight associated to it. This is referred to as the cost/weight. A path is a sequence of vertices in the graph. A graph is said to be connected if there is a path between a vertex to each other vertex. A cycle is when the starting vertex is the same as the ending vertex. A tree is a special type of graph, where the starting is from the root node to every other node. But the tree has no cycles.
Graph Implementation:
An adjacent list: There is a master list of vertices. Each edge has a list maintaining the adjacent vertices. Very compact and space efficient. But to determine if a connection exist between two vertices then it will take time since you must go through each list and check. For a dense graph, the time will increase proportionally with the graph.
An adjacent matrix: Every vertex is written as a row and heading. If the connection exists, it can be presented as a weight. Adjacent matrix is faster to than adjacent list when it comes to look up since it requires a simple array lookup. However, adjacent matrix is not efficient to space, for a sparse graph, much of the adjacent matrix it will empty. For a directed graph, half the information will be empty.
What is traversing? Traversing is going through all or some elements of the data structure. Iteration is a type of traversal.

Depth First Traversal:
Depth first traversal traverses a graph in a depthward motion and uses a stack to remember to get to the next vertex to start a search, when a dead end occurs in any iteration. So a depth first travel, follows a path from a starting vertex until we reach the end of the vertex on that track. It then goes back an iteration and visits all the neighboring path in that vertex, and so on, until there are no longer any vertices to cover. We backtrack until all have been visited.
The depth first traversal algorithm:
-	Push the first vertex onto the stack
-	Mark this vertex as visited
-	Repeat
o	Visit the next vertex adjacent to the one on top of the stack
o	Push this vertex onto the stack
o	Mark this vertex as visited
o	If there isn’t a vertex to bisit
o	Pop this vertex off the stack
-	End
-	Until the stack is empty

DFS uses stacking  whils BFS uses queuing.
Breadth First Traversal:
Breath first research algorithm traverses a graph in a breadthward motion and uses a queue to remember to get the next vertex to start a search, when a dead end occurs in any iteration. The BFS starts by examining the nodes closer to the vertex and gradually starts examining those further away from the vertex.
Rule 1: visit the adjacent unvisited vertex. Mark it as visited. Display it. Insert it in a queue.
Rule 2: If no adjacent vertex is found, remove the first vertex from the queue
Rule 3: Repeat rule 1 and rule 2 until the queue is empty
An algorithm description:
-	Enqueue the first vertex
-	Mark the first vertex as visited
-	Repeat
o	Visit the next vertex adjacent to the first vertex
o	Mark this vertex as visited
o	Enqueue this vertex
-	Until all adjacent vertices visited
-	Repeat
o	Visit next unvisited vertex adjacent to that at the front of the queue
o	Mark this vertex as visited
o	Enqueue this vertex
-	Until all adjacent vertices visited
-	Until the queue is empty

Shortest path by Dijkstra: The goal is to find the shortest path between two vertices. The objective is to find the shortest path from the starting vertices to any vertices. An example of greedy algorithms since we select the shortest distance every time. It makes local optimum decisions in the hope to make a good global optimum.
Vertex – Shortest Distance from A – Previous Vertex
A – 0
B – 3 - D
C – 7 - E
D – 1 - A
E – 2 – D
Dijkstra Path: We use two lists, one to keep track of the vertices we visited and one to keep track of the vertices we did not visit.


Example:
A – B-\-
| -/- |    C
D – E-/-
Have a table ready with
Vertex – Shortest Distance from A – Previous Vertex:
And a list of Visited=[] and unvisited=[]
How does this algorithm work?
	For the starting position, A, fill zero for vertex A and blank for previous vertex since they are empty and it’s the initial vertex.
	For the current vertex (A), examine its unvisited neighbors. In our case B and D
	We are currently visiting A and its unvisited neighbors are B and D. Update the list by adding A to the list of visited.
	For the current vertex, calculate the distance of each neighbor from the start vertex to D and to B. Update the table with the shortest distance. In our case add 6 to B, and 1 to D. Also fill out the previous index to A for both.
	Move to D, since it’s the shortest path and update the visited list. Examine its neighbors, in our case B and E.
	Calculate the shorted distance from A via D to its neighbors and update the list if it is less than the existing. In our case B will update to 3 and E will update to 2.
	Always Visit the unvisited vertex with the smallest cost. And update the table if the distance is shorter.
	Update the table and Visited and unvisited as you go along.
	And so on….
In other words:
1)	Let distance of start vertex from the start vertex = 0
2)	Let distance of all other vertices from start to infinity
3)	WHILE vertices remain unvisited
i.	Visit unvisited vertex with smallest known distance from start vertex, call this the current vertex
ii.	For each unvisited neighbor of the current vertex
iii.	If the calculated distance of this vertex is less than the known distance
1.	Update the shortest distance to this vertex
2.	Update the previous vertex with the current vertex
iv.	End if
b.	Next unvisited neighbor
c.	Add the
